Project Gutenberg's A Balloon Ascension at Midnight, by George Eli Hall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: A Balloon Ascension at Midnight

Author: George Eli Hall

Illustrator: Gordon Ross

Release Date: May 2, 2015 [EBook #48851]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BALLOON ASCENSION AT MIDNIGHT ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









A BALLOON ASCENSION AT MIDNIGHT




   AUTHOR'S AUTOGRAPH EDITION OF
  A BALLOON ASCENSION AT MIDNIGHT

    LIMITED TO THIRTY COPIES ON
     IMPERIAL JAPAN VELLUM OF
    WHICH FIFTEEN ARE FOR SALE.

       THIS COPY IS No. ____

            [Signature]

            [Signature]


    "There is no conquest to which the entire human race aspires more
    ardently than the Empire of the Air."

                                           A. Santos-Dumont:
                                       _The North American Review._


AEROSTATION

    M. Etienne Giraud, l'intrépide aéronaute, et M. Georges Hall de
    San-Francisco, partis de Paris dans le _Rolla_, out atterri à Cézy,
    situé à 5 kilomètres de Joigny, après une tranversée de dix heures
    assez mouvementée, quoique sans accident.

                                        _Le Figaro._




            A BALLOON
      ASCENSION AT MIDNIGHT

               BY
         GEORGE ELI HALL


       WITH SILHOUETTES BY
           GORDON ROSS


          [Decoration]


  PAUL ELDER AND MORGAN SHEPARD
          San Francisco
              1902


        _Copyright, 1902_
              _by_
         George Eli Hall




    "Upwards of five hundred thousand two-legged animals without
    feathers lie around us, in horizontal positions; their heads all
    in night-caps, and full of the foolishest dreams."

                                        Carlyle: _Sartor Resartus._


I.

We had agreed, my companion and I, that I should call for him at his
house, after dinner, not later than eleven o'clock.

This athletic young Frenchman belongs to a small set of Parisian
sportsmen, who have taken up "ballooning" as a pastime.

After having exhausted all the sensations that are to be found in
ordinary sports, even those of "automobiling" at a breakneck speed,
the members of the "Aéro Club" now seek in the air, where they indulge
in all kinds of daring feats, the nerve-racking excitement that they
have ceased to find on earth.

I might add that these facts were but vaguely known to me before I had
been introduced, by a mutual friend, to this _nouveau siècle_ young
sportsman, and had accepted his invitation to accompany him in his
next aerial voyage.

When we reached the vacant lot at the huge gas works of St. Denis,
where our balloon was being inflated, I could not help feeling a bit
alarmed at the sight of that little bubble--only a few hundred cubic
metres--and the very small basket which were soon to take us up in the
air.

All the _éclat_, the ceremonial, and the emotional "good-bys" that
usually accompany the "let her go!" of a balloon, were totally lacking
when the "Rolla" left the earth. The start was effected in a quiet and
business like manner, and the act seemed so natural to the people who
were helping us off, that their demeanor on this occasion had a
beneficial and soothing effect on my excited nerves.

[Illustration: {A hot air balloon flies over the streets.}]

A few minutes after midnight, when the last little sacks of sand
ballast had been hung out over the edge of our wicker-basket, when a
final glance had been given to the ropes, the net, the valve,
etc.,--with a careless _au revoir_ from the foreman of the gas-works,
and a parting joke from the _cocher_ who had driven us there,--the
dark forms, whose hands were holding us down, silently stepped back,
and with a gentle and graceful swing the "Rolla" started off on its
sixth ascension.

       *       *       *       *       *

Had we taken with us another small sack of ballast, our balloon could
not have left the earth. In other words, its ascensional force was
almost balanced by the weight it was expected to carry. After rising a
few hundred feet, and finding a cooler current, which slightly
condensed the gas, the "Rolla" ceased to ascend. We were met by a
gentle breeze from the north west, and began to cross Paris, a couple
of hundred yards above the city.

It would take the pen of a Carlyle to describe our mysterious flight
over Paris at midnight. The impression was so startling that for an
hour we never spoke above a whisper.

Owing to the increasing coolness of the atmosphere, our balloon had a
slight, though constant, tendency to descend. But we easily kept our
altitude by occasionally throwing overboard a spoonful or two of
ballast.

After ascertaining that we would not come in contact with the towers
of Notre Dame or the sharp edges of the Eiffel Tower, we decided to
keep the same distance, and let the breeze do the rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

At our feet Paris is breathing, like a monster with a million eyes.

On the right, at the very top of Montmartre, and looming up in the
glow that surrounds it, stands the white Basilica of the Sacred Heart,
with its colossal marble statue of the Redeemer watching over the
city.

The great boulevards roll out in every direction like ribbons of fire;
we can hear, as we sail over them, the muffled rumbling of a thousand
carriages, and we watch them as they dodge each other in their
complicated course.

A cry, a call, from time to time, reaches our ears; but the others are
lost in the mighty silence above us.

"There is the Opéra," whispers the owner, as he points to a square
silhouette, bathed in a lake of electric light.

I seem to have no fear, merely the sensation of relief that follows an
irrevocable decision; with the feeling that we are tasting a forbidden
fruit, breaking some divine and primeval law. All our faculties are
concentrated in our eyes, and they feast on this wonderful sight.

"Those dark pits that dot the surface of Paris are gardens," explains
the owner, "innumerable private parks; and most Parisians live and die
without ever suspecting their existence."

We cross the Place de la Bastille, soaring above the bronze column,
with its graceful statue of Liberty, whose useless wings of metal seem
childish and a bit ridiculous as we pass on.

A long and purple fissure that cuts the city in twain marks the Seine,
long before we reach it. The "Rolla" feels the cool current that rises
above the waters. A few handfuls of sand thrown overboard, and we
resume our former position.

Our eyes are now accustomed to these weird and unusual effects, and
few details of the picture escape us. In the distance another bright
spot, Bullier, the students' ball, in the heart of the Latin quarter.
That obscure mass beyond must be the Luxembourg and its gardens.

Here we leave the dome of the Panthéon on our right. Below us the
lights are gradually thinning out; we are passing over the crowded
_faubourgs_, where thousands of poor and tired human beings are
resting in sleep.

An ocean of darkness and silence opens up before us; we sail into it.
The breeze freshens, and the glowing blaze of Paris soon fades away in
the distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

From now on the minutes drag, in the awful silence of this mysterious
night, and every moment is heavy with anxiety. Those hours are
endless, really hard to live, until at last the gray dawn steps out of
the horizon.

Nature begins to awaken, and, with the first gleam of daylight, slowly
the world comes back to life.

The first cry of a quail or the cackle of a pheasant is a delight to
our ears. A dog barks and another howls. Lazy and sleepy peasants,
leading huge oxen, drag themselves out of their farms, on their way to
a hard day's work in the fields. The cocks crow lustily, and, in the
distance, from the little town of Nemours, comes the melodious call of
a bugle, arousing "Pitou," the French "Tommy Atkins," from his sleep.

The sun drives away the soft gray mist that lingers over the meadows;
a few shadows here and there still mark the wooded valleys; but they
soon melt away, and a glorious summer morning, in the beautiful land
of Burgundy, bursts upon us from every side.




    "Oh! qui n'a pas senti son cœur battre plus vite,
    A l'heure où sous le ciel l'homme est seul avec Dieu!"

                             Alf. de Musset: _Le Saule, IV._


II.

We are now passing over the little hamlet of Uri, and the voice of a
cuckoo-clock tells us the hour, as it pipes up in the breeze its five
double notes.

"The temperature is very even," remarks the captain, "and there is no
danger of it rising or falling unexpectedly, at least not for an hour
or more. We might as well travel with the guide-rope, and skip along
close to the earth."

He slips the line overboard and lowers it carefully to the ground.

The guide-rope, though a mere cable, about two hundred feet in length,
is a very delicate accessory to a balloon, and the most important
after the anchor. When in operation, one end of the rope is attached
to the basket, and a quarter or a fifth of its length is allowed to
drag on the surface of the earth, where it regulates automatically the
air-ship's aerostatic equilibrium.

If the balloon has a tendency to fall, an additional portion of the
guide-rope drops upon the ground. Instantly the "Rolla" is relieved of
that much weight, and soon resumes its former altitude.

On the other hand, should its tendency be to rise, the extra amount of
rope that it hauls up with it means for the "Rolla" a few pounds more
to carry, and it gradually falls back to its original position.

It has also the serious advantage of saving gas, and sand ballast as
well.

"That modest young fellow you met at dinner the other night," remarks
the captain, "uses the guide-rope with great success as part of the
steering-gear of his new _aeronef_, the 'Santos-Dumont V.' We all
expect to hear within a few weeks that Santos-Dumont has solved the
great problem of aerial navigation."

[Illustration: {The balloon flies over fields and forests.}]

The farmers who can not understand this new method of locomotion are
all eager to tug at the guide-rope, thinking we have decided to land.

"_Mais non! Laissez donc!_" shouts the owner; "_nous nous promenons,
tout simplement._"

The children, who are playing scarecrow with the ravenous birds in the
orchards, scream with astonishment and delight. An old woman folds her
hands over her mouth like a megaphone, and asks:

"_Ou diable allez-vous donc?_"

"_A la lune!_"

"_Ha! Ha! Bon Voyage!_"

A flock of sheep stampedes at the sight of our shadow moving upon the
earth, and disappears in a cloud of dust.

We glide peacefully over meadows and swamps, clearing hedges and
trees, dragging the guide-rope behind us. As we pass over a lake in
the park of an ideal country seat, we see the "Rolla" reflected in the
clear waters below.

Even at this moderate height, the farms look like children's
playhouses, with their curly little lambs, their wooden horses, and
painted cows; and as we approach a curve on the railroad track, a
train puffs by like a mechanical toy, and whistles a friendly salute.

Here the captain calls my attention to a dark line of clouds in the
north west.

Yesterday's _Herald_ predicted a depression within the next
twenty-four hours; evidently a storm is creeping up behind us. But the
same wind is driving us on, and we hope to keep out of its reach, even
if we have to rise up in the heavens above it.

"If our balloon obeys as it should, we will soon have some fun," says
the captain, as we reach the first trees of a thick forest.

The "Rolla" is so sensitive that by merely hauling in a few yards of
the guide-rope, we gently descend on the tops of the trees, lightly
skipping from one to the other; we brush by an elm, a poplar, or an
ash, and as we pass, pick their fresh green leaves.

This weird performance is fascinating beyond words. I have never heard
of a "promenade" on the crest of a forest, and I wonder now and then
if I am dreaming.

Such accuracy of movement is only possible with a very small balloon,
in the early hours of the day, and with a perfectly even temperature.
Of course, it is always dangerous, as a slight mistake would instantly
lead to a hopeless disaster.

Suddenly, while crossing a deep ravine, the coolness of the air drags
us down. The rocky banks of the torrent are upon us.

As I open my mouth to offer a mild objection; a hatful of ballast goes
overboard; we instantly shoot up in the air, and, before I can realize
what has occurred, the barometer marks six and seven thousand feet.




    "C'est d'en haut qu'on apprécie bien les choses humaines et il
    faut avoir passé sur les points élevés pour connaître la
    petitesse de celles que nous voyons grandes."

                                              Alf. de Vigny.


III.

I shall never forget this first and sudden leap to such terrifying
altitudes. I thought we would never stop rising, and stood breathless
as I saw the earth leave us, sink in at the centre, and swell out at
the horizon like a bowl.

How often have we not followed with delighted eyes the majestic flight
of the clouds, and longed for their liberty and the freedom of their
voyages in the skies?

Rolled in heavy masses by the winds that drive them on, they move
peacefully in the sunlight like a fleet of sombre ships, with prows of
solid gold. Now bunched together in small and graceful groups, thin
and sleek like birds of passage, they fly swiftly with the breeze,
iridescent and translucent, like huge opals picked from the treasures
of heaven, or sparkling with immaculate candor, like the snow the
winds harvest on the crest of inaccessible _sierras_, and carry off on
their invisible wings.

They have seen, perhaps in a single day, the countries and the homes
we love, and cherish in remembrance or in hope. They have passed over
spots that have beaten time to our happiest hours; they have looked
down upon places that have witnessed our deepest sorrows.

Up to their glittering realm we rise, and cutting through the
impalpable vapor, we reach the upper spheres of everlasting starlight
and sunshine, where the limits of the empyrean begin, that mysterious
zone, visited only by the queen bee, once in her lifetime, on the day
of her "nuptial flight."

[Illustration: {The balloon up in the clouds.}]

Followed by ten thousand lovers, each with ten thousand eyes to watch
her, she ascends like a prayer in the sweet-scented freshness of the
morning.

The amorous horde, like the moving tail of a comet, devours the space
beneath her.

Never before has she breathed the dew-laden breeze, never has she felt
the blinding rays of the sun.

But she has heard the eternal voice of nature; and drunk with the
perfume of a million flowers, staggered by the riotous cries and
plaintive wails of her wooing drones, transfixed by the ocean of
divine light above her, she rises to heights unknown. One by one, her
exhausted lovers have given up the chase and fallen like so many
stones in the depths of the abyss below: strange and mystic
manifestation of the survival of the fittest.

Now a mere handful, with throbbing flanks and starting eyeballs,
strives to follow her to the mysterious sacrifice of royal love and
death.

One, the last one, the Chosen one reaches his Queen; her arms are open
to receive him, and he falls in their mortal embrace. He lives his
whole life in a second, and gives up the ghost in one gasp of
ineffable ecstasy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The varied emotions of our trip above the clouds are simply
superhuman, but the owner does not seem to enjoy them:

"_On ne s'amuse pas ici--descendons._"

I know he is longing to play with the trees again; but before I can
answer, the valve-rope is jerked, and we drop two or three thousand
feet.

Looking up through the open appendix, I can see the interior of the
balloon, the valve-rope hanging in the centre, and watch the valve
open and close at the top.

We are now traveling with the wind at a speed of forty miles an hour,
but we feel no motion whatever. The hills, the meadows, the hamlets,
rush toward us in a mad race, as if driven by the mighty hand of God.

The world looks like a painted atlas, with every little detail
carefully marked. As I compare it with the military map in my hands, I
can not tell which is the better of the two; and, moreover, at this
altitude, they both seem the same size.

The captain is throwing out ballast,--quite a lot it seems to me. But
the barometer is still falling. Down we go, and in a moment we are
close to earth again. Half a dozen peasants are harvesting in the
grain fields.

"Captain! we are dead birds this time!"

"_Pas encore_," replies the owner, "but be sure before we touch ground
to swing up on the hoop above you or the shock might break your legs."

The advice is worth following. No sooner said than done, and the
basket after kicking off the top of a haystack, drops in the midst of
the dumfounded farmers.

Relieved for a second of its weight, the "Rolla" bounds ahead. More
ballast flies out, and we are off on another trip to the clouds.

       *       *       *       *       *

Exposed, as it is, alternately to the burning rays of the sun and the
numerous cool currents that we meet on our way, the "Rolla" soon
becomes flighty and hard to control. A few minutes later we are not
two hundred feet over the meadows.

Another rise, without apparently any cause for it, and soon we are
falling again; this time over the ancient city of Sens, with its
beautiful cathedral, around which the quaint old houses are huddled,
and held close together by a belt of green boulevards.

As I wonder how we would look impaled on that sharp gothic steeple, a
dozen pounds of ballast sends us skyward like a rocket.




    "It's not the distance, it's the pace that kills."

                        L. A. Robertson: _The Dead Calypso._


IV.

It was then ten o'clock. We had traveled by actual measurement on the
map, one hundred and eighty kilometers. The heat was increasing
rapidly and the sensitive bubble over our heads had become more
erratic than ever. Down it would drop a few thousand feet, if a cloud
happened to darken the sun, and then up three or four thousand, as
soon as the cloud had passed on.

This constant "bobbing" up and down at a terrific pace, added to the
heat and lack of sleep, was gradually telling on our nerves. Ten hours
in a basket, under such circumstances, is about as much as any
ordinary man can stand. Without wasting any time in idle discussion,
we decided to _atterrir_--in other words, to land, as soon as the
necessary arrangements for this important operation had been
completed.

The "Rolla" was then at nine thousand feet; we had lost the wind on
our way up, and below, in the west, the storm was rapidly gaining on
us.

We had still four sacks of sand ballast of the nine we had taken up
with us. Every knot that held them to the basket was carefully
examined; a precaution of vital importance, as we would soon be above
the clouds again, if any of them escaped us in the varied incidents
that might attend our descent. The lunch-basket and our coats were
also securely fastened, and the anchor partly unlashed and made ready
to be dropped.

I held the barometer, with eyes glued upon its face, ready to call out
our future altitudes. My companion, with the valve-rope in his right
and the ballast-spoon within reach, was still gazing earnestly at the
fields in the distance, where we hoped we might stand alive a few
minutes later.

[Illustration: {A woman looks up at the balloon.}]

Not a word had been spoken for some time, when the captain said:

"Our landing, I think, will be a hard one. I dislike the way those
trees are scattered beyond that narrow valley. We never should have
allowed the storm to reach our heels,--but it has to go now----," and
his hand gives the valve-rope a long and heavy pull.

We can hear the gas sputter as it leaves the creaking silk.

Instantly the barometer drops. We have started on our final descent.

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain's fondness for "valving" had set us falling again at an
awful speed, and the sand he was throwing out was rising around the
"Rolla" in little thin clouds, and dropping like hail on the silk
above us.

I looked down. The earth was rising!--rising to meet us, like a
fabulous mother eager to receive her children in her outstretched
arms.

I stood hypnotized and cold, until called back to my barometer. I saw
that the captain's teeth were set, but his eye was clear and serene.

We now realize to its full extent the _gravity_ of the situation.

The needle is jumping in my hands. "Twenty-two hundred
metres--twenty-one-fifty--twenty-one----!" The storm is not a mile
behind us, and the heavy wind that precedes it rolls in graceful waves
over the wheat and barley fields.

"Seventeen hundred and fifty metres--seventeen hundred--sixteen
hundred----!"

We are falling at an angle of thirty or forty degrees. Everything
below us is moving at lightning speed.

"Twelve hundred and fifty--twelve hundred--eleven hundred metres----!"

My voice is slightly hoarse, but I call out the numbers as fast as I
see them, and they follow each other in rapid succession.

"Nine hundred--eight hundred and fifty--eight hundred metres----!"

The sudden change of altitude makes us both very deaf; but I can still
hear the captain say:

"Haul in the other sack of sand!--We must keep up long enough to clear
that forest and land in the field beyond, this side of the large clump
of trees."

The ballast is doing better work, and we are not falling so rapidly;
but only half of the treacherous forest has been cleared: there is
more and enough of it, that stands threatening below us.

"We shall never sail over it," mutters the owner.

At this moment we swing into a violent gale, forerunner of the storm
behind us. The "Rolla" quivers in its net, seems to hesitate for a
mere second, and bravely leaps ahead.

"Too much of a good thing----," and above us the valve is roaring
furiously.

"Whatever happens, don't jump!" cries the captain.

Of course, had I done so at any time, he would have shot up in the air
ten or fifteen thousand feet.

"_Attention! Voici le moment psychologique----._"

Like a hawk swooping down on its prey, and with the same graceful
curve, the "Rolla" clears, with ten feet to spare, the crest of the
last trees.

We hear the guide-rope dragging in the branches.

As quick as a flash the captain has the anchor overboard.

But the gale is driving us on, and the iron teeth fail to bite the
sod.

We clutch at the hoop and the rigging above, and with a crash, the
basket strikes the earth.

The shock throws us back into it.

The balloon bounds on several hundred feet, rolling like a huge
football. We are dragged, tossed, bumped, and bruised. Everything in
the basket is smashed, and the claret on the captain's face looks like
blood.

I barely have time to disengage my neck from a couple of slender and
wiry net ropes that are doing their best to strangle me.

A peasant, mowing near by, hears our cries; he drops his scythe, and
kicking off his wooden shoes, tugs at the guide-rope lustily.

The anchor has found a soft spot, suddenly the cable tightens, and our
aerial trip is ended.

By this time a few excited villagers have come to the rescue from the
neighboring fields.

As we crawl from under the tangled mass of net-work and rigging, a
terrorized child falls in a fit at the sight of this unusual
performance, rolling in the grass and screaming with fright.

We are both rather pale and a bit weak in the knees; but, oh! the
exquisite sensation to feel the good old Earth under our feet again!

       *       *       *       *       *

A few steps away, "Rolla" lies panting in the sunshine.

With every gust of wind he seems to exhale his life.

His quivering form is sinking rapidly; we hear his heavy sighs and
watch his quivering skin.

The plucky little fellow makes another desperate effort to rise up to
the spheres he has conquered; but his strength at last betrays him,
and he falls back on the green, empty, motionless, dead.

                                          Paris, June, 1901.




[Illustration: FINIS]


    "In the pilgrimage many things happen that are not to the taste
    of the pilgrim."

                   Sheik Ali Mohammed: _The Rose of Bagdad._




ELEVEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIVE COPIES OF THIS BOOK ON OLD STRATFORD
DECKLE-EDGE PAPER AND THIRTY COPIES ON IMPERIAL JAPAN VELLUM HAVE BEEN
PRINTED FOR ELDER AND SHEPARD BY THE TWENTIETH CENTURY PRESS IN THE
YEAR MCMII, AND THE TYPE DISTRIBUTED.


[Decoration]




Transcriber's Note

Illustration captions in {braces} have been added by the transcriber
for the convenience of the reader.





End of Project Gutenberg's A Balloon Ascension at Midnight, by George Eli Hall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BALLOON ASCENSION AT MIDNIGHT ***

***** This file should be named 48851-0.txt or 48851-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/8/5/48851/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

